as far as you can hi I'm Luke Ryan for
Joe Blow calm and welcome to movie
endings explained in this episode we're
going to be looking at the 1968 sci-fi
classic Planet of the Apes the film was
written by Michael Wilson based on an
original draft from Twilight Zone
creator Rod Serling which in turn was
based on a 1963 novel by French author
Pierre Boulle entitled Planet of the
Apes or sometimes monkey planets while
the Michael Wilson draft stripped down a
lot of the ideas in Rod Serling's
initial crack at the script his take on
the twist ending of the film was
retained more on that later
Franklin J Schaffner was brought on
board as the director and with Charlton
Heston and the starring role Planet of
the Apes became a very successful film
for a science-fiction picture
particularly with critics more than
anything it follows a group of
astronauts traveling through deep space
who awake after a year or so of
hibernation sleep to a crash landing in
a vast lake one of their shipmates died
in hibernation leaving Charlton Heston's
George Taylor along with dodge and
Landon they make their way across an
eerie and desolate landscape wrestling
with the knowledge that they have now
moved past the time on earth they once
knew by over two thousand years by
traveling at near light speed the people
of 1972 they left behind would now be
living in the year three thousand nine
hundred and seventy eight Taylor appears
very comfortable with this information
and accepts their fate quite readily
while his crewmates especially Landon
are quite uneasy with this concept they
eventually come across humans who
appeared to be very primitive then a
group of horse riding apes turn up
attacking all of the humans eventually
shooting Taylor in the throats and
capturing everyone in the first moment
of social commentary that the film
generally weaves very smoothly into the
entire story and in a very
tongue-in-cheek manner we see the Apes
posing for pictures with their halt of
capture
humans unable to speak Taylor is
presumed to be as unintelligent as the
other humans on this planet though he
strives to communicate without his voice
leading the Apes to believe he's not as
worthless as the others and between this
point of the film and the end there's a
whole lot of story and I think Planet of
the Apes is one of the all-time great
science fiction films a great story with
engrossing production design that really
makes the best of a smaller budget than
you might expect memorable performances
and a film that's capped off by perhaps
one of the best endings of all time
Taylor manages to leave the ape
settlement to venture out to the
Forbidden Zone an area outlawed by the
Apes for centuries it's revealed that a
non simian intelligent society may have
lived on this planet before Taylor along
with a number of apes including
Cornelius who had previously discovered
some relics of that past arrived as an
archaeological dig site inside a cave a
human doll is among the artifacts that
were uncovered along with dentures by
glasses and a heart-valve
but the skeptical dr. Zaius refuses all
of the evidence waving away the idea
that man had once been intelligent and
ruled this planet generations ago
Taylor eventually ties up Zaius who then
admits the truth from men there's got to
be an answer and Taylor definitely did
not like what he found as he journeyed
further into the Forbidden Zone as the
film reaches its dramatic and iconic
conclusion he eats out the surprise
reveal as much as possible
saving the full money shot for the very
last moment anyone familiar enough with
the iconography of the Statue of Liberty
should recognize the outlines
oh my god
I'm home all the time and finally really
did it damn you
[Music]
I really like how this bombshell finale
the reveal the tailor has been on earth
all along plays with no music at all
it's a nihilistic final note and all
you're left with much like Taylor is the
eerie echoing of the waves lapping
across the shore
Taylor has to sit with this and so do we
he is literally flawed by this
revelation but what in the hell is there
to explain at no point in the film does
anyone say this might be earth 2006
years into the future or hey it's the
Statue of Liberty I guess we're still on
Earth after all
just the visual alone tells you
everything you need to know and in lieu
of a dramatic score to punctuate the
moment you instead have the
scenery-chewing condemnations from
Charlton Heston it's the idea that
mankind is doomed to destroy herself
jeaious refers to man as a warlike
creature who gives battle to everything
around him even himself and that tailors
breed turned to the Forbidden Zone from
a paradise into a desert the ending is
generally considered to be one of the
great twist endings in all of cinema but
is it even really a twist the idea is
very simple and in fact has been
signposted throughout the entire film
for most who haven't seen it they may be
aware of the ending already the Statue
of Liberty scene is one of those
pop-culture moments you seem to just
absorb by osmosis even if you haven't
actually seen it let alone seen the
entire film itself cleverly Taylor's
stance in the film about this pre ape
civilization don't ever align with the
notion that he's actually still on earth
he views it as an entirely new planet
with an ancient buried history of
technologically advanced humans even
when he finds the heart valve and the
dentures he notes that they're similar
devices the earth had and that they all
point to the weakness of man poor
eyesight bad heart false teeth the man
who was almost gleeful at the fact that
he had travelled 2,000 years past the
earth he once knew who was so confident
in the science he believed in didn't for
a second consider that they had merely
traveled forward through time and ended
up right back where they started in an
earth unfamiliar to them the arrogance
of man is projected through Taylor when
they first meet the primitive humans and
he suggests that they could easily take
over and run the planet themselves look
in the bright side
this is the best they've got around here
and six months we'll be running this
planet now at the very beginning of the
film we open with Taylor dictating the
time dilation theory that even though
his crew had been traveling the earth
had already aged 700 years we even see a
dual clock on the ship that depicts
Earth's time and then the ship's time
Taylor even supposes that the people who
might be reading his message in Earth's
future will be a different breed
hopefully a better one you who are
reading me now a different breed I hope
a better one this is literally all in
the first 70 seconds of the film and
neatly bookends the film with this
central idea when you look at the
beginning of the film and you look at
the end even Landon when the crew first
ventures out from their ship seems
skeptical and says this it's not so much
where we are as when we are all in the
first 10 minutes this idea that they
might actually be back on earth way into
the future is presented really boldly in
front of you on the screen then there's
the fact that the landscapes and
surroundings of the film are exactly the
same as earth we have humans breathable
atmosphere nothing about the scenery
looks oddly unlike earth the original
script from Rod Serling who came up with
the Statue of Liberty twist apparently
depicted the ape civilization as
technologically advanced but it would
have been too costly to film to show the
Apes is living more primitive Lee was
more achievable for the budget they had
to work with which ultimately I think
helps the story as the concept of the
human society who ruled earth before
bringing about their own demise in an
advanced technological world is a very
fitting and thought-provoking idea the
original novel is much different
revolving around a space traveling
couple Jin and Phyllis who find a
manuscript in a bottle detailing a man's
journey to Betelgeuse with two other
companions they end up on a planet run
by Apes and that story within the story
follows much of what the film shows us
at the end of this manuscript the man
returns back to earth to find it
inhabited with intelligent apes Jin and
Phyllis scoff at this entire story and
throw them
manuscript away it's revealed that Jin
and Phyllis and actually civilized
chimpanzees traveling through space and
they both found the idea of intelligent
humans to be ludicrous it's a wonderful
twist but one that only really works in
the form of a novel with the visual
medium of film the gag would be ruined
from the opening scene and so the film
adaptation instead focuses on this story
within the story from the original novel
but expands upon the threat of an
ancient advanced human society that once
lived on the Planet of the Apes and
removes a return trip to earth instead
weaving the twist that the Planet of the
Apes is earth into the story I think the
fact that the twist ending to Planet of
the Apes has worked for so long and
still ends up retaining the surprise
reveal even though it very fairly spoon
feeds you all the ingredients of the
twist is one of the great magic tricks
in the history of film and even if you
do know the ending which I did when I
first watched the film the way in which
Charlton Heston portrays this journey of
discovery makes it all work regardless
[Music]
it's a dark ending that offers no hope
and crescendos into bleakness it makes
you think about what we're doing to the
world and how we very well could end up
destroying it ourselves
the older Planet of the Apes gets the
more slicing and close to the bone its
final message becomes but it's really up
to you whether you resign yourself to
that possibility or whether you resolve
your hope that completely wiping
ourselves out will only ever happen in
the fictitious story of the Planet of
the Apes
[Music]
fictitious story of the Planet of the
Apes in the fictitious story of the
Planet of the Apes